1. Display the disk usage of the current directory (.).

command:
du -h --max-depth=1 .

Instructions:
To display the disk usage of the current directory (.) in Ubuntu, you can use the du command. Here's how you can do it:

bash

du -h --max-depth=1 .

Explanation of the command:

    du: Stands for disk usage.
    -h: Human-readable output (e.g., in KB, MB, GB).
    --max-depth=1: Limits the depth of the directory hierarchy to 1 level, meaning it will only show the disk usage of the current directory and its immediate subdirectories.
    .: Specifies the current directory (.).

Output:

Running this command will output the disk usage summary of the current directory in a human-readable format. It will list sizes of files and directories within the current directory, along with a total for all listed items.
Example Output:

mathematica

12K     ./subdir1
36K     ./subdir2
48K     .

This example output indicates that the total disk usage of the current directory (.) is 48 KB, with breakdowns for subdir1 and subdir2.

Using du with these options provides a quick summary of disk space usage within the current directory, making it useful for checking storage usage on Linux systems.

2. View the available disk space on all partitions in the system.

command:
df -h


instructions:
To view the available disk space on all partitions in the system in Ubuntu, you can use the df command. Here’s how you can do it:

bash

df -h

Explanation of the command:

    df: Stands for disk free and is used to display information about available disk space on file systems.
    -h: Human-readable output (e.g., in KB, MB, GB).

Output:

Running df -h will list information about all mounted partitions along with their sizes, used space, available space, and utilization percentage. Here's an example of what the output might look like:

javascript

Filesystem      Size  Used Avail Use% Mounted on
/dev/sda1        20G   10G   8G   55% /
/dev/sdb1       100G   50G  50G   50% /mnt/data

Explanation of the output fields:

    Filesystem: The device or partition name.
    Size: Total size of the file system.
    Used: Amount of space used.
    Avail: Available space.
    Use%: Percentage of used space.
    Mounted on: The mount point of the file system.